danarTebi
danarTi 1
individis erovnuli uflebebi

Individual's National Rights
(Denied, neglected or regulated?)
In Georgian "nation" (eri) means only "the people of the same stock, history, language, culture and future, who have a state or are striving to have it", not the state itself, as it does in a number of modern European languages. The German double notion – "Volknation" and "Staatnation" – fits both those meanings. So does the English "race", whose "uncreated conscience" James Joyce is planning to forge in his "Portrait of the Artist".
In the present paper I shall use the term "nation" only in its Georgian meaning cited above.

Comfort-oriented and ontologically-motivated national needs, demands and rights.
Which are the individual's national feelings, needs, demands and, accordingly, his non-alienable human rights, if these feelings are genuine, fundamental for a human being and compatible with analogous feelings of other individuals of other nations? Numerous conflicts testify to the fact, that feelings and needs of this kind do exist. The answer can be found in a quite inductive way: facts are to be registered and classified (types of possible problems and conflicts are to be identified) and observations are to be critically analyzed. It is probably convenient to start from the most obvious two types.
Type 1. Individual of the nationality A is resident in the country B and is citizen of the state B, e.g. a Frenchman is resident in Manchester and an Englishmen is resident in Lyons. Their personal quite genuine nationally = motivated demand and, accordingly, their inalienable human right is: not to be discriminated because of their foreign nationality. This is the wish and need of any Englishman residing in France and vice versa.
Type 2. If the gentleman in question is not the only one living in Manchester or Lyons, then his genuine need and inalienable right may refer to the whole group of his kinsmen in that city as well: He may be ardently wishing that the multitude of the French in Manchester or that of English in Lyons might forever remain French, or English, linguistically and mentally, the latter meaning, that they keep the French, or English, vision of their native History, French, or English, cultural attitudes and so on, and never will be forced to behave in a different way. 
This wish of those two gentlemen may be based on purely comfort-oriented motives like that of being free from discrimination (It is pleasant to have a group of one's kinsmen, with the same cultural, linguistic and mental identity, around oneself). But they may be motivated by a principally different wish and need as well: Those two gentlemen may be wishing to be sure, that their nation does not diminish in number and their host nation does not grow at the expense of their compatriots, i.e., the group is not to be culturally, linguistically and mentally assimilated.
The latter motive is in no way connected with practical interests of those two men. It is based on the ontological (ontic) need and demand to be (to exist) in the fullest sense of this verb, i.e. to exist and affirm oneself in as broad a field as possible and as completely as possible. "Being as one of the two Mohicans" means less than "being member of a surviving nation" and the latter phrase means less than "being member of a rapidly growing and gloriously developing nation" (In the same way as "being a man with no posterity", other things being equal means, in a human's view, less than "being a man with numerous posterity"). That ontological need and demand of humans may be irrational, but it exists and works. There are lots of comfort-oriented national needs and demands of men and women (even the social right of a child to be taught mathematics and science in his (her) mother language is based, essentially, on the fact, that this way of education bears better fruits in rapidity and quality of learning, than the opposite one), and there are lots of ontologically oriented ones. (The one expressed in the phrase "My human need is to be (exist) as member of a nation., which, in principle, is equal in its merit and value with any other nation and which has chance, if its members are wise, and diligent, and virtuous enough, to survive forever" belongs to this latter class). There is a vast class of national needs and demands as well that are neither purely comfort-oriented, nor ontologically-rooted in an explicit way, but rather are symbolic: they are pointing out to ontologically-founded national needs and demands of the individual in question. They function as signs and proofs of the fact, that the nation in question exists and is going to exist in future, and – accordingly – as levers for supporting this existence, at the same time. Even the national language, which is being spoken and is developing, has, along with its all other functions, a symbolic function too: it is a proof and sign, that the nation in question is living and functioning. The firm will of nations to keep their native language is not only reason for the fact, that they want to keep their nation, as nation, alive: it is, as well, the result of the fact, that, keeping their language, they want to keep their nation alive.
It is to be noticed, that the modal verb "may" when we think that a Lyons-resident Englishmen may care for surviving of his kinsmen-group in the city as English in their language and mind, means, that the phenomenon in question is not universal. It may happen that he does not care about this dimension of the events. Even more. The two gentlemen in question may be indifferent or nearly indifferent about the English or French linguistic identity of their own posterity in their city. In other words, while it is scarcely imaginable that a reasonable man can be indifferent to his comfort-oriented national interests, there are persons indifferent or nearly indifferent to the ontologically-based ones and, accordingly, to the ontologic and the symbolic interests of their nation. What is the logic of that phenomenon? The answer lies in the psychological and philosophical structure of that ontologically-based needs, i.e. in the multitude of primary motives determining that need, some of which may be lacking in the mentality of the person in question. Note. Contrariety between the moral duties of a foreign-residing man, who is citizen of that foreign country, to the country of his nation on one hand and to the country of his residence and citizenship on the other hand emerges only, or mainly, in the realm of ontologically-based national and symbolic interests, not in that of the comfort-oriented ones. The dichotomy in an individual's moral duties, i.e. in his psychological binding with the country of his residence and citizenship, on the one hand, and with his nationality-proper, i.e. the country of his kinsmen and his homeland (Vaterland) on the other hand, is quite visible in the comically hued but real and relevant question: whom is the gentleman in question, being no football fan, to support, when watching the game of the two national teams at the World Championship? There is no universally adopted answer for this question, which means, that the present civilization is not sure about the hierarchy of values incorporated in moral motives that are determining one option or the other.

Ontologically-founded national feelings and needs
The ontologically-founded need and demand to be (namely, to be in the fullest sense of this verb) and a number of its derivatives (secondary needs based on it) are, partly, observable in the human social behavior, partly revealable in the inward emotional and mental life of the human beings in a phenomenological way. Ontologically-founded national need and will are built on a number of fundamental characteristics of that inward life which are accessible, in their specific aspects, both for empirical observation and for phenomenological insight, including introspection. Those characteristics are:
1.	Man builds his idea of his self (Ich- Konzeption ) only in comparison with others, they are his background. The criteria according to which he measures his advantages and those of the others are not his personal inventions or his insights. They are common. In the same way he builds his image of his nation and the nation builds its self-image in comparison with other nations. Nation is a section of Mankind and the so-called "natural man" (i.e. the non-philosophizing men) is aware of this fact.
	The individual man most ardently wishes to affirm himself among other men. In the same way he wishes (and his nation wishes) to achieve the nation's successful self-affirmation among other nations. The "background" for the individual's personal self-affirmation is, in principle, "the multitude of all men". For his national self-affirmation (and for that of his nation) the background is "Mankind". The idea of "nation" – not that of "we, this population" or "we, those of this totem" – emerges and comes to its maturity, historically, only coupled with that of "Mankind" (not that of "the left neighboring tribe" or the "right neighboring tribe"). Mankind can feel to be "one" only in its opposition with other Mankinds in foreign galaxies and with problems. Otherwise it is sure to be seeking for self-affirmation in opposition with other parts of its own whole. So, the idea of the nation, as will-endowed entity, is a correlate of "Mankind", not of "neighborhood" or "environment". If the result of the individual's self-affirmation effort is zero, his frustration may be lethal or leading to suicide. The same is likely to happen, if his self-identification with his nation is genuine, in the case of national frustration in its self-affirmation efforts. So, there is much ground for expecting the natural man to be able of sacrificing his life for preventing this event.
2.	It is a fundamental characteristic of humans to be gathered into in-groups, a great number of which are marked with intense positive values (my family, my colleagues, my fellow = citizens and so on). Emotional and mental ties of an individual with his in-group may be so strong, that he quite sincerely feels "I will, and I wish, and I even hope to live in these persons after my death". If so, then he is, psychologically, able to sacrifice his life for that group (his family, his nation, his friends etc.). In other words, his binding to this group, his ties with it are genuine. The value of this group may mean and/or imply for him the value of both the life or welfare of its members and the integrity of the group as a whole. It may happen that the value of the group is derivative from the value of the cause, which this group is serving (a scientific research group, a political group etc.) This means: if the nation as one's in-group is able to bring satisfaction for this or that genuine need of the individual in question, then it is natural for it to have secondary (i.e. derived) value in his eyes.
3.	It is a fundamental trait of a human that a number of his most valuable things and his most intense interests lie outside his skin. In other words, he is experiencing those things as "values in itself", not merely "useful" things, i.e. "operational" ones. His most fundamental feature is his ability and inclination to sacrifice his personal being for attaining advantages for those "outer" valuables. The best example is his unselfishness in defending his posterity, which is based on his hereditary philogenetical instinct. So, if his personal experience of the value of his nation for him is genuine, or if his sense of having "common blood" with it is vivid enough, then it is natural for him to be able for sacrifice.
4.	Man's two more fundamental characteristics are:
–	the principal infinity of the field of his cognitive interest. He is watching the World events and he sees there processes which he would like to develop in this or that direction.
–	his attitude to happenings that he sees cannot ever be only that of a spectator. He wants to be, at least ideally, a participant in ruling the World in a not anonymous way. The only organizational form in which he may, in his own name, take part in World regulating, consists in doing it as member of his nation. One more trait of human nature is the fact, that he lives in history, both the past and the future one, he wants to know his "roots" at the same time and he wants to have a definite answer, whom he is to support in his mind, as political and strategic actors in the next and the future centuries (i.e. he wants to know the future shape of his nation). So, his nation is for him the only group (macro-in-group) whose membership enables him to be participant in history and in the present functioning of the Globe System.
5.	Mental and psychological mechanisms of genuine self-identification with one's groups and macro-in-groups, including the nation, are manifestations of deep layers in the human nature. It is obvious, that the sense of "sameness" i.e. "identity" in its strictest etymological meaning (idem_the same) is a stronger tie between members of a group than that of "likeness" ("my kinsman" is a stronger ground for tying than "a driver like me" or "tall like me" or "poor like me" or "rich like me"). Accordingly, the communist idea of "class loyalty" as a guiding principle is much further from being real and impressive for social and political processes than that of "ethnical loyalty". Ties like "mutual loyalty in serving the same cause" may be very strong but they are good rather for small groups than for macro-groups with the only exception of very rare historical moments of large-scale (mainly, revolutionary) movements. In everyday life and in comparatively slow historical processes ties based on sameness remain the most genuine ones for two reasons: first, because of their unchangeability (a kinsman cannot become a non-kinsman, while an ally can became a foe and a revolutionary can became a counterrevolutionary), second, because the "sameness" factor (namely, that of national sameness) is accompanied by self-identification with one's own history, on the one hand, and the flavor of one's native culture, on the other hand. It is important, too, that the more the internal structure of a civilized society differentiates, the more the role of national self-identification in it, as the only common one in "this" society, rises in its importance.

The natural inference from those facts is: national feelings, needs and demands of an individual are a reality, deeply founded and rooted in the human nature. They are strong and they are stable. In some points of their "logic" they are based on irrational postulates like all the mansion of human culture is , but they are a fact and they are practically universal, which means, that they cannot be neither neglected, nor outlawed, nor prohibited, nor artificially ignored on the ground of judgments like "Nationalism leads to wars. So, let us drop national instincts and superstitions once and forever" (This logic is as absurd as the one would be: "There occur wars for agricultural land and other sources of food. So, let us drop farming and feeding, then there will be no war"). 
Instead, methods for defining what justice among the nations is should be developed and forms for implementing it should be designed.

Individual's national rights and nation's rights. The nation is viewed and experienced by its member individuals as a collective quasi-personality. Max Scheler, one of the founders of the modern philosophical anthropology, thinks of the nation as an integral spiritual personality, whose visibility dramatically grows in the times of war (Max Scheler. Nation und Weltanschauung Leipzig, 1923). 
One of the many grounds for justifying this judgment lies in the fact, that the nation has a sense of responsibility – pride for its good deeds in history and shame for the evil or mean ones. The fact, that the individuals can (and tend to) view their nation as a personality, means, that they define the word and the idea "nation" – either consciously or in a vague feeling – "from up downwards" (from "Mankind" to individuals) rather than "from down upwards" (from the individuals to "Mankind"), in other words, they think of their nation as part and member of Mankind, endowed with rights and burdened with functions, rather than merely of a multitude or an aggregate of individuals, whose mutual identity is a likeness-based, (residing "here", “speaking this language", “having this citizenship" and so on), not a sameness-based one, and whose wills are summed up to make one will merely by coincidence, not thanks to their substantial "one-ness" which may be interpreted in various ways, including "inter alia", the biological one and the mystical one. In this sense the nation, phenomenologically, really is a "collective personality", one of the several hundreds or several thousands owners of the Globe, whose mental, moral, emotional, organizational structure is determined by its functionality (namely, by its function of being one of those several hundreds or thousands), not by its composition and size. This feeling and thought, not easily visible at the first glance, is the gist of national self-identification and of the consciousness of national duty in all its forms.
The nation, in the "natural man's" view (not only in that of the reflecting and philosophizing one) is one of those traditional genetically, linguistically, territorially, culturally, historically, politically determined and defined macrogroups, whose being different from one another and having their own identities is, logically, the result of the very first division and grouping of Mankind (both historically and in synchrony, i.e. as participants both of the History and of the present World System), and who are meant, as characters in History and in the present World Drama, to survive and remain in their present identity and their present kind of macro-group in the predictable and unpredictable future. This way of viewing one's nation is a quite sufficient (psychological) ground for viewing his nation, its existence, integrity and "eternal" future as an independent value, belonging to the class of the "absolute", i.e. indispensable ones.
Having this status is the right of any existing nation. Belonging to a nation who has this status is the national right of any individual. In other words, every man has the right to have for himself a nation with that status (quite irrespective of whether he is resident in the country of his nation or not). Stressing the fact that this national right is an indubitable right of the individual, not only that of nation as macro-group, makes sense in contexts, where the importance of individual's interests and that of collective interests are discussed and the former are being categorically privileged at the expense of the latter, including the national ones. The very popular proposition "we are to concentrate on individual's rights, not on those of the state and the nation" can be responded by "yes, but national interests are those of individuals, too, not only those of state or nation".
It is to be noted, as well, that ontologically-motivated (founded) national needs (and accordingly, values, since "needs" and "values" are mutually determinant) inevitably are going to clash, systematically and in many political and humanitarian contexts, not only with non-national needs and values like "welfare", "good health", "good salary", "liberal governance", "low taxes" etc, but with comfortability-oriented national ones as well. Therefore, the purely academical challenge arises: methods (including a set of questionnaires and psychological tests) are to be developed for measuring the strength (i.e. vitality) of specific needs and values (i.e. the degree of their indispensability for a human being, if he (she) is to remain biologically satisfied, safe and calm). Studies of this kind, most probably, may result in discovering, that the very popular belief – "high" ("sublime") values (i.e. those inseparable from the human nature as rational and free being) are the feeble ones (i.e. the less vital ones) – is an illusion. They can be the strong ones as well. "Strong" (i.e. vital) and "high" (i.e. inseparable from the characteristic of Man as rational and free being) are not classes of values and needs, but their dimensions. So, the "high" needs and values may prove to be in the "natural man's" eyes,_ not only in the philosopher's eyes, – the strongest ones. If so, then there remains no ground for inferring that the values "native land", its "freedom" and its "eternal surviving", as "high" values, cannot belong, at the same time, to the "strongest" ones. Conscious patriotism, very often styled as "nationalism", is practically, in some degree, an universal feature of human feeling and thinking.
That's why national feelings and national consciousness, based on the partly mythical but ineradicable concept of "the same blood" and on common history (both the past one and the future one) are the most powerful driving forces for Man's political activity nowadays and in the foreseeable future. This means, that in any large-scale conflict, including World wars, there are, other things being equal or approximately equal, more chances to win for those, who, as macro-in-group, build their mutual loyalty and fighting spirit on national slogans, than for those, who base their ideology on purely pragmatic social ones. 
One of Man's most sublime characteristics is his ability to oppose the Being – the universe with all its governing Powers and its Laws – quite alone. But if he, psychologically, remains in Mankind, then he inevitably has his in-groups in whom he can genuinely feel, or imagine, or hope to "live after his death" and at the hands of whom he genuinely hopes to master the sea of values and valuable things he could not master during his short life. The macro-group "nation" is not the only one of this kind. But, being a naturally ("genetically"), linguistically, historically, culturally identical one, being "eternal" and freely chosen at the same time (it is my choice whether I want to remain in my nation or to be renegade to it), cannot, as form and criterion for dividing (grouping) men, be matched, or rivaled, by any other form of macro-group (social class, religious community, business company, political party etc.).
So, the very popular rumor of "nationalism" being "overcome", to put it with M. Twain, is a great exaggeration. Ethnical interests, including the national ones, cannot be regulated by prohibiting, condem­ning, banning or outlawing them. They can be regulated only by means of introducing the dimension of fairness, of mutual responsibility and internationally recognized justice between them.

Nodar Natadze
Tbilisi, 26.09.2010
