Enclosure 2a
Nodar Natadze
Chairman of the Popular Front of Georgia

A Public Letter to the UN, OSCE, Council of Europe, Governments of the G – 7 States, the NATO States, the EU States

concerning details of western policies in Georgia, which, 
in the author's view, can be, and are to be, improved in 
order to be more persuasive and efficient	‘
Excellencies
The non-Russian countries of the USSR were faithfully pro-western because they hoped to be liberated 
a) nationally and 
b) socially. 
The democratically minded Russian, as well as a number of not democratically minded ones, thought, the western way of life would better fit their nation than the socialist one, yet they were not quite sincere in their democratic creed, because they feared to lose – if the communism would fall – their empire. Vast historical experience, as well as the most profound modern analyses of human personality, testify to the fact, that national feelings and national consciousness, based on the partly mythical but ineradicable concept of "the same blood" and on common history (both the past one and the future one), are the most powerful driving forces for Man's political activity nowadays and in the foreseeable future. This means, that in any large-scale conflict, including World wars, there are, other things being equal or approximately equal, more chances to win for those, who, as macro-in-group, build their mutual loyalty and fighting spirit on national slogans, than for those, who base their ideology on purely pragmatic social ones. The inference to be drawn is: The powers leading the Good World in its resistance to the assaults by the Evil World never can neglect national (ethnical) goals of the participants, and (or) attempt at neutralizing them by propagandizing the idea: "The central interest is that of the individual, never that of the nation (ethnos)" "Nationalism is vicious and dangerous," "Aspirations for national self-affirmation are not admissible, because they are sure to lead to conflicts. So, it is better to drop them all at once", "National consciousness and national feelings are nothing more than superstitions", "Let's extinguish all the historians, then the life will be plainer and more pleasant" and so on. They should, instead,
a) either find and implement norms and laws for establishing justice in the relations not only between individuals, but between nations (tribes, peoples) as well. 
The national (ethnical) interest of an individual is double.
First: He is to be free from discrimination because of his ethnicity. Second: His nation (ethnos) is to be free from the fear of extermination, assimilation, deprivation of its territories, of the right to inherit the achievements of its former generations, and so on. The opposite view formulated as "drop your national feelings, fears and aspirations, because they lead to wars!" is erroneous both practically and in its principle, just as the advice would be: "there happen wars for food and prosperity. Forget the fear of losing them, then there will be no wars".
b) Or they are to define, which are the Good nations and tribes and which are the Evil ones, and support the former against the latter. Those, who want to be the leaders of the Good ones against the Evil ones, may be content with the latter (b) option. Those, whose ambition is to lead the World in the form of UN or other international bodies, cannot. They must choose the former (a) option. Namely, they have to define what the justice between nations (tribes, peoples) consists in (in equality? In pragmatic estimation of the merit and importance of specific nations? And so on) and offer their findings, as topics for a free discussion, to countries and their peoples, with the ultimate goal to be able, finally, to have their definitions completed as a result of analysis, consent and mutual compromise.
It is to be realized, that Mankind can feel to be "one" only in its opposition with other "Mankinds" in foreign galaxies and with problems. If left alone, it, in any case, cannot escape having most acute oppositions within it. It is an indubitable sociological and socio-psychological truth, that an individual can build his notion of his personality (Ich-Konzeption) only against the background of other men. In the same way, a group is conscious of itself, of its identity, its goals and values only against the background of other analogous groups. If a macro-group is sufficiently important for its members (i.e. their self-identification with it is deep and genuine) and civilized, then its goals and values inevitably comprise those of "being, ideally, actor in the present World system and history" and "participating, ideally, in ruling the Globe under our own name". It is a nearly universal characteristic of Man that he has genuine in-groups in whom he can genuinely feel, or imagine, or hope to "live after his death" and at the hands of whom he genuinely hopes to master the sea of values and valuable things he could not master during his short life. The macro-group "nation" being a naturally ("genetically"), linguistically, historically, culturally identical one, being "eternal" and freely chosen at the same time (it is my choice whether I want to remain in my nation or to be renegade to it), cannot, as form and criterion for dividing (grouping) men, be matched, or rivaled, by any other form of macro-group (social class, religious community, business company, political party etc).
So, the very popular rumor of nationalism being "overcome", to put it with M.Twain, is a great exaggeration. Ethnical interests, including the national ones, cannot be regulated by prohibiting, condemning, banning or outlawing them. They can be regulated only by means of introducing the dimension of fairness and of internationally recognized justice between them.
The point of the present letter is, that my country, Georgia (not its ruling clique) is ready, in its mind and its feelings, to hail both the above mentioned forms ("a" and "b") of world governance, both for those nations and peoples who have independent states, and for those who have none. The reasons are:
First: Georgia feels itself, both historically and now, to be a typologically western nation, most ardently striving for alliance with the West. Having spent more than XX centuries in bitter battles, for surviving and keeping its national identity, against two eastern powers excelling it in human numbers and strategic potentiality (Iran, since XI – Turks), and since XIX – against Russia as well, who annexed Georgia in 1901 and 1921 (the latter was done in alliance with Turkey), Georgia defines its most vital interest as seeing the dominance of those three powers in the region being strategically, economically and culturally overshadowed by the western influence.
Second: The pivot national goal of Georgia – that of surviving, keeping its territory safe, keeping its independence and developing – is in line with all unalienable human rights, that are codified in international documents up to now or are to be brought to general attention and codified in near future. There is no spot in Georgia's territory, where the Georgian population is not autochthonal; There is no spot in Georgia's territory, which, at any moment in history, was outside of Georgia's present borders either under the Georgian Kings' rule, or under that of foreign invaders, and there is no man or woman of non-Georgian ethnicity who is or at any moment was discriminated, in any way, because of his or her ethnicity. There is no (and historically never has been any) fact of religious or other form of intolerance in spite of the fact that the above mentioned incessant offensives against Georgia were, as a rule, motivated, inter alia, by religious grounds. Anti-Georgian movements, conspiracies, propaganda attacks and large-scaled armed assaults, led mainly by Russia (but not only by her) are, as a rule, based on most overt and demonstrative "right of fist" (Faustrecht). So, it is vital for Georgia to have the World ruled by universally accepted norms for regulating really ethnical, pseudo-ethnical and national conflicts, religious or pseudo-religious conflicts and international conflicts including those between super-states and small states. Those norms are to be as comprising, as concrete, as detailed as possible, and their implementation – as consistent and as rigid as possible.
I am going to communicate to Your Excellencies some details on specific conditions of life and state of minds in my country, which, I believe, are not to be neglected in planning, if the policies of the Great Democracies in Georgia and in the region are to be correct and efficient.

I. Political ideas and feelings in Georgia
The crude fact is, that Georgia is ruled by a group of men, infantile in their minds and criminal in their deeds, who are in power since 2003 thanks only to
The popular bitter hatred of Shevardnadze and his Russia-guided antigeorgian policies.
The foreign support in their struggle for power
The very popular belief, that Saakashvili is a "West's man" and, therefore, has the most probability to be supported by the West.
It is evident, too, that the Shevardnadze administration was, and the at present ruling one is, consciously destroying Georgia in nearly all dimensions of its statehood and its everyday life, obeying to Russian orders but in the name of "western values," in order to discredit the latter and to awake and cultivate popular antipathy to the Democratic West. The administration is deliberately pauperizing the population by means of economical sabotage (breaking down and selling for scrap-iron functioning enterprises, including the very well-doing small and middle-sized ones, selling power-stations to Russia, several times, in succession, blowing up the most important blocks at the Gardabani heat and power plant, selling agricultural land to foreigners and letting the local farmers jobless, hewing out the forests etc.) It is cultivating criminal monopolism, destroying the science and the education system, sharply cutting every attempt at creating any institution of a real civil society and at developing any element of a really independent middle class, etc, thus stimulating the young part of the nation to emigrate, with the not very remote goal of brining to Georgia a new, non-Georgian population from the neighbor and remote countries, which is going to vote in any case for the nation-destroying ruling party.
While the most realistic interpretation of these policies 
"Both the Shevardnadze administration and the Saakashvili's one are Russia's men, but they are allowed by Russia, in strictly defined limits, to serve others (including the West) as well".
is confined to the best educated and the most intelligent 25% of the georgian nation, and the opposite of it, the belief, that
"All disasters we are watching in our country stem from bad relations with Russia, the latter being, quite justly, irritated by the fact that we have good relations with the West"
 is that of the least educated and least intelligent 10% of the population, the rest, 65%, the bulk of the nation, are hesitating between two extremes. One of those two is:
"Yes, both Shevardnadze and Saakashvili, very probably, are Russia's men, even more – Russia's most loyal, ear-cut (it is a Georgian idiomatic expression) slaves, but why did and does the West tolerate them as rulers, imposed with the western support on their nation and country, as well? For it is quite visible, that the West deliberately shuts its eyes and ears not to be aware of their bloodiness, corruptness, dictatorship, of their being Russia's men (which cannot fail to be guessed by everyone)? Maybe, the fact, that they are anti-Georgian in their real policies, is an advantage, not a shortcoming in the West's eyes, because the Great World Democracies prefer to see Georgia merely as territory rather than as a standing ally? " 
The other extreme is: 
"All is lies! We can't be sure that the West did not, so far, or is not going to sell us to Russia, fearing her nuclear weapons, or to make a deal with her, hoping to solve, thanks to Russian support , a number of its own problems".
The middle-way attitude is:
"Alas, it is a fact, that many western policies in Georgia are inadequate and inconsistent with vital interests of our country. But it is possible to persuade our western allies or the most important ones among them to change their policies".
 All those parties are watching, most attentively, the development of events, eager to base their opinions and decisions only on real facts.

Georgian values and the Western values
The basic values the modern western civilization is built on are in Georgia not the imported ones. They are traditional, centuries-old and millennia-old. They coincide with the western values. The ideas that Man is a rational free being, able and duty-bound to chose between Good and Evil, that his personality, God's image, is not divisible or changeable into any set of other values and valuable things and cannot be viewed as means, but only as end in itself, that there are dimensions, in which men are not equal, but there are others, too, in which they are equal and the latter of those two classes is the one that matters, and many others, that are the ground of the most substantial moral principles in modern Mankind, are inherent in Georgian mentality and Georgian civilization. The external cause of this lies in the fact, that Georgia is a Christian country (Christianity has been the state religion since 325, the Apostolic Georgian Church has been autocephalic since 465), four fifths of its territory are feudal in their history (not a despoty, like Georgia's neighbor countries have been), one fifth of Georgia (namely the highland) lived, historically, in so-called "military democracy" i.e. in the form of free communities, immediately under the Kings' rule. The Georgian popular attitude to the democracy today is direct heir to the democratical spirit of the Georgian so-called "enlightenmental and didactical poetry" of XVII-XVIII centuries and to the consciously western-oriented ideology of the Georgian Liberation Movement (since I.Chavchavadze 1837-1907). The present-day Georgian mentality is perfectly conscious of the possibility and admissibility of critical remarks concerning democracy like that by H.Besancon "Democracy Is being suggested to modern Mankind as a value. It is not a value in itself. It is one of the possible forms of social organization", having, at the same time, a counter-remark to it of its own: "Yes, but democracy is the very form of that organization, which is more than any other able to incorporate two absolute values – that of freedom and that of equality. That is why democracy is worth of sacrificing one's life for it, not only of voting for it". This is the typical attitude of a typical Georgian. All this being so, yet the typical Georgian does not think that these two values -- freedom and equality – are the only ones in human minds and souls. There are others as well, worth of self-sacrificing and indispensable for one's self-respect The latter are not only the derivatives from Freedom and Equality, like "freedom of opinion and speech" and the principle "one man –one vote", but wholly independent values as well, like those of "living" and "leaving a posterity with eternal future", of "taking part, in principle, in ruling the outer World", of Justice, of Kindness, of Compassion, of Common welfare and many others. One's Homeland, i.e. the territory, owned by his (her) nation, where the latter freely lives and develops – is one of those values not sacrificeable for anything else. The fact, that the human emotion of unselfishly loving one's Homeland is natural and deep, means, that democracy of today, i.e. the rule of the today's demos, whose majority is endowed with this type of love, never can neglect that feeling.
So, the typical Georgian's attitude to the modern notion of democracy is that of staunch loyalty in spite of existing problems, rather than that of ardent, but shallow enthusiasm. Democracy is viewed as an indispensable condition to living in a human (not sub-human) way in the full sense of the word. Being staunch in practicing and defending democracy is viewed as an indispensable condition to remaining a human. 
 The typical Georgian is viewing the notion "freedom as trait of democracy" not merely in the sense of "freedom from" (from violence on the part of police etc.), but in the sense of "freedom to" as well. He is e.g. willing and planning to restore his Homeland as really independent welfaring country and he wants to have free hand for achieving this goal. He wants the government of his country to have efficient levers for this end. He does not want, of course, to cover his country with concentration-camps in order to be "strong", as Stalin and Hitler did, but he is indignant when he sees, e.g. the high school in his country deprived, by force, of adequate teaching Georgian history, with the only (quite transparent) goal: to make the children forget that they are part of a nation who has a history, thus killing in their minds and souls intense national ambitions and political creativity. This is just a small part of a large-scale program of destroying science and education in Georgia (started in 2006-7), when the spectrum of specialities was dramatically narrowed, the number of students was halfed, teaching basic science at the high school practically disappeared, almost all research institutions for basic science were closed. The official ground for this policy is put into one word "reform", yet its real logic is clear: "Fundamental science and a far-flung system of teaching it are superfluous for this country. Georgia being actually a poor and endangered nation is not to be a toiling, thinking and technologically, socially and culturally developed one. No Georgian needs to know more in any field than he (she) can apply in his (her) present job, which is to be that of a hotel-manager, a waiter, a driver etc". The fallacy of this logic lies in the fact that the Georgian nation is not willing to be that of hotel-managers and waiters: First, individuals' striving for science and university education is in the Georgian nation traditionally very intense. Second, Georgia cannot afford not to have own competent experts in all fields of basic and practical knowledge who can be trusted without hesitation and who are motivated in their work not only by their fees, but by their civil morality and patriotic duty as well. The average citizen is irritated, as well, when he sees extremely antipedagogical programs on all TV screens, that are completely monopolized by the government and its puppet companies, or by other grant-fed ones. His most acute indignation is provoked when he is suggested, by force, the idea, that the government of Georgia is not to take steps for saving the Georgian villages from becoming desert, which any nation would, quite naturally, experience as a disaster for its present and future, Georgian industrial production in a number of fields--from selling it at criminally low prices, the merchant fleet--from being sold to foreigners at symbolic prices etc, because "it is not democratic to artificially intervene in economical processes in the country, it is a duty of a modern-minded government to let those processes go on as they do". In brief, policies that are by great numbers of people viewed as "western-oriented" and "West-prompted", are aimed at completely eliminating the state will to rule the nation in rational, national (i.e. serving the national interests) and constructive direction. Those absurd policies (I repeat: 25% of the population think them to be Russia-ordered) pretend to be based and focused, inter alia, on Human Rights norms, which, allegedly, consider only the so-called "strong" demands and, correspondingly, "strong" values to be worth of being allowed and defended (i.e. those that are vital), but not the so-called "high" (sublime) ones, i.e. those that are inseparable from human nature as rational and free being.
This premise is absurd as well. High values can be, and in a very great number of cases are, as strong, i.e. vital, as any others. ("high" and "strong" are dimensions of values, not their classes). E.g. the human need of seeing his country and his nation strong and developing, not fading down and mentally degenerating, is a high one but at the same time an indubitably strong one. (The task of developing adequate methodic, including questionnaires, for measuring the strength of specific values I think to be a most acute academic challenge) . One of the top-high values--that of freedom--is being suggested and practically offered to the young generations as freedom from restrictions to giving way to one's most simple, plain and zero-productive inducements which have no outlook for developing one's personality. At the same time it is quite consciously being hidden from the eyes of the young men and women that the most decisive freedom for a human being is that of ruling the outer world according to the voice of his (her) reason, which is guided by his (her) sense of responsibility, his (her) good will and divine ability to think the norms for human behavior in the form of laws and law-based states. The result is, that young men and women are stimulated to develop the comparatively mean sprouts in their nature, but to suppress at the same time their most sublime ones. It is a sad fact, but a fact, that the highest activity in these "brain-washing" practices is being demonstrated by the "Heinrich Bll Shtiftung" and the "Liberty Institute" in Tbilisi who are broadly known for their inclination to man their staff and their teams of "activists" with individuals of Georgian nationality but of least mental brightness and least critical intuition.
 (These common practices remind of an old anecdote about a European travelling in Russia in winter, who, walking through a village, is attacked by dogs, but cannot take a stone because it is frozen to the earth. He says: "what a strange country, where stones are tight up and the dogs let loose").
 These ideological devices are aimed at subverting the possible positive state activities in Georgia. There are others, of a different type, as well, that are aimed at 
irritating men and women in the name of "western values" by hitting their moral sense and that of pedagogical responsibility in everyday life and at
humiliating them by imposing on them new "norms" of personal and social behavior, the logic of which their minds and hearts refuse to understand.
It is obvious, that the so-called natural man (which is the synonym for "non-philosophizing man") has his natural questions: Is the sanctioning (allowing) of a gay parade by a municipality a sign of democracy? Or, rather, it is (especially, if it is known to be indirectly imposed on the town or city in question) an encroachment of the gay minority (practically – of a foreign gay group) upon the single living space and the single pedagogical environment of the local majority who are not at all gay in their hearts, but rather sad, and who never can intelligibly explain their children, what sublime ideas may be incorporated in a homosexual marriage or what can the sacred notion "family" in this context mean? No social or ethnical layer of the Georgian society needs to be taught what the tolerance in this realm of everyday life is: gentlemen and ladies were known--twenty years, fifty years, hundred years and centuries ago – to belong to the group in question, but they never were hinted at this fact, nor ostracized because of it, nor discriminated in any other way.The society used to know that intervention into the private life of a man or woman was inadmissible, in spite of the quite natural fact, that the practical omnipresence of this "sin" in some of the neighboring countries (namely, the muslim ones except north Cauicasia) was viewed by the Georgian society with irony. Policies concerning those parades and analogous novelties in social life are not a matter of tolerance or intolerance. They, quite plainly, are matters of dividing the public space between a multitude of claimants, completely neglecting the plain truth, that the existence of a claimant is not sufficient ground for his having a share in the division of the object in question.
The homosexual propaganda in Georgia, by the way, contains, inter alia, a large-caliber lie: "Homosexuality" is being propagandized as a trait of the "western values," which can be truth only if average parents in the western countries are praying to God that their children might grow up to homosexuals. The other normal question is: "The existence of "benighted" sects is not a new phenomenon in Georgia. Sects like "triasuns", "pliasuns", "Khlists" etc, manned and womanned mainly by Russian, are familiar to Georgia since the first Russian annexation in 1801. They never provoked any emotion on the part of Georgian population. But why should the fact of munificently sponsored "watchtower" proselytism not be irritating, when the people see that souls of starving men, women and children are being bought by money? Why should the Republican Party of Georgia whose leaders are hiring out their Georgian names and their party seals for signing anti-Georgian documents be sponsored by the "Conciliation Resources" in London?
These questions are not so grave as the above-cited political ones, like "why should it be, as a matter of fact, prohibited to Georgia's state to apply levers which all the democratic states apply, or did apply when it was needed, for defending their countries from economical, organizational and political ruin? Why and what for, when it is known, that the purely natural development of external events, unless there is an internal will to resist it, is sure to lead Georgia to being demographically overflowed by Asia (including the nearest one), to be expropriated economically by greater and richer neighbors, to be humiliated in every dimension by the same and more remote neighbors who have more adequate rulers than Georgia has, and, finally, to be swallowed, once more, by the northern neighbor? Why should rulers having no state will and responsibility be imposed upon Georgia?" – but these questions are able to contribute to discrediting the West in the eyes of the population no less than the gravest ones.
The nation's attitude is quite explicit: it wants to be taught the skills of building modern institutions of democracy, but does not want to be falsely taught what the idea of freedom is and what, accordingly, the sense of a vast class of values is. Is this explicit will of the nation to be neglected? Or to be broken? Or to be paralyzed by force and brought to silence? If yes, then it means war upon that nation or, as minimum, an attempt at psychologically depressing it. None of those two can be the goal of our western friends and allies. If "no", then why should not, as minimum, the development of events within that society be let to freely go as it goes, thus making the question, whether Georgia is going to win the battle for its right to be a normally developed, toiling and thinking nation or to lose it, a matter of free competition? The state propaganda in governmental TV and that of grant-fed NGO-s is doing its best to persuade the nation, that national effort to correct the natural course of events in accordance with the national interests is evil in any case and that unconditioned yielding to purely pragmatic goals of the moment, though they be advantageous for interests of the aggressive neighbor, is good, and wise, and democratic in any case. Yet the above-mentioned popular suspicion, that those subversive propaganda moves are not only Russia-ordered, exists, and shutting eyes to it is probably the worst policy among the thinkable ones.

III. The Georgian vision of national and ethnical rights of Man and rights of Nation
1. Right of property is the most adequate device for enabling a man to keep the fruit of his today's work for tomorrow and to leave it to his posterity. Nation is a genuinely experienced in-group ( i.e. group of self-identification) of men, women and children, who feels itself to be a sort of collective personality. The latter is, to some degree, proven by the fact that nations have consciousness of responsibility – pride for their good deeds in history and shame for the evil ones. So, it is just for a nation to have right to inherit historical achievements of its former generations (first of all – the territory) quite irrespective of whether their happiness of being heirs to this good or mediocre territory equals that of all other nations on the same planet, or not. That's why the Georgian attitude is: Georgia, as part of the Earth, belongs to the Georgian nation, as part of Mankind. Georgia's citizens,irrespective of their ethnicity, are absolutely equal in their rights, including the right of their posterity to heir the territory in question as an eternal source of livelihood. So, it is right of the Georgian nation (i.e. Georgians who live, who are dead and who are going to be born) to have one of the state's goals defined as "keeping Georgia independent, named "Georgia", existing in its present borders and remaining Georgian, i.e. communicating with its citizens in literary Georgian language, at the same time bound, quite evidently, to do, proportionally to its resources, all the duties that are common to Mankind." The same is, in typical Georgian's view, the right of any nation having a state in its country.
On the other hand, no nation, or ethnos, or ethnical group, quite irrespective of its size, merit and legal ground of its existing in this territory, — even if it consists of only two Mohicans – can be sentenced to vanishing. (Why? Because it consists of humans for whom the vanishing of their nation is an unbearable trauma). The inference is, that the minimal set of absolutely indispensable national (ethnical) rights for any nation (ethnos) and any national (ethnical) group is to be defined internationally and forms for implementing them as universally obligatory norms are to be devised. These rights are, probably, to comprise and include, in some form,
- the right to exist as nation ( ethnos) or as national (ethnical) group, i.e. to keep its language and vision of history, to be free from the fear of discrimination for individuals and the fear of compulsory assimilation for the group as a whole (practical devices, as education in one's native language and so on, are means for these ends). Yet there is more to say. The rights enumerated here belong to every ethnical group including diasporas, i.e. ethnical groups who have a country of their own abroad, the fact of whose existence gives them the satisfaction of knowing that their nation is alive and is going to live and develop forever. But there are peoples (nations), including very small ones, who have no other homeland in the world and who live under conquerors' rule in their single homelands. These nations – so believe the Georgian in their overwhelming majority – are to be unreservedly liberated, according to the principle of decolonization (the examples of Tibet and of the North Caucasian nations are, usually, quoted in this context). But there are other types of problems too. One of them is the case of the Hebrew nation who had lost its homeland completely and regained it in 1948 (the Georgian believe – quite in line with justice). The other type are nations who, having no other territory of their name in the world, live in a territory in which they are not considered to be a "savagely conquered and ruthlessly ruled colonial nation (ethnos)" (like, e.g. the Chechens indubitably are). Those nations (peoples, ethnoi) are being referred to as "local minorities," as "not recognized nations" and they are many hundreds. The typical Georgian's attitude to those peoples is that of sympathy with their aspirations for independence, but it has to be expressed with caution, because no one is eager to sharply contradict to the opinion of the World Community and no one has sufficient information for adequately judging each concrete case. One thing, however, is, in an average Georgian's eyes, indubitable: The vital rights of those minorities cannot be reduced to the above mentioned ones. They are to comprise as well the right to seek for their own way for bringing into reality the eternal human ideas of justice, welfare, common happiness and so on. This means that they are to have the right of building, where they compactly reside, a society of their own, i.e. a form of common life according to their natural data, their temperament, their traditions, their problems and their tastes. The natural inference should be – and in an average Georgian's eyes it really is – that as long as those non–recognized nations (peoples) and their homelands remain in those states, they are to have legal levers to build that society and they are to have legal levers to express, in some form, their opinion and will in international organizations including UN.
The topic of "local minorities" and of the criteria for distinguishing them from non-local ones, i.e. diasporas, is for the typical Georgian a very important one. The Apsua people of Adighean stock who immigrated to Georgia from North Caucasia mainly in XVII century and who were called "Apkhaz" because the Georgian province where they settled had the name "Apkhazeti" (Apkhazia), was a diaspora. This immigration was preceded for many centuries, from time to time, by that of others, also Adighean tribes, who left no trace in local culture and politics. That of XVII century was the last and the greatest one. In XVII-XVIII this people made approximately half of the population in that province. Yet, living in Georgia under Georgian kings and having adopted, in its upper social layers, the feudal form of life, this people dropped its self-identification with other Adigheans, thus becoming a separate national (ethnical) entity. That's why--so the Georgian think – they now are a local minority in Georgia, no more a diaspora, and they are along with their Georgian citizenship, to have within Georgia levers for building, within the frame of their very widened municipal competence, a society of their own with laws not contradicting the Constitution. This right is to be valid as long as the present self-identification of this people remains. If their self-identification with other Adigheans is revived and, therefore, immigration of Adigheans from the north is desired and attempted at, this will mean that the self-identification of this people is returning to that of a non-local minority, i.e. a diaspora. There is no right on the part of the Apsua ("Apkhaz") people to claim independence from Georgia: there is no date in history when Abkhazia became part of Georgia, this territory never has been outside Georgia (including ancient Kolkhis); The process of Apsua immigration, either in its peaceful form or the bellicose one, never was carried to the point of juridically separating that territory from Georgia: the legal and political status of the province was that of a principate, ruled by the princes Shervashidze, who were vassals either to Megrelian princes Dadiani who were vassals to the Kings, or (from time to time) immediately to the Kings of Western Georgia. So, the Georgian sovereignty in this territory is indubitable. The typical Georgian attiude is: "our goal is double: recovering our territory and building harmonious life with the Apsua ("Abkhazs"), but the former does not depend on the latter: the 90 000 Apsua ("Abkhazs") have no right to veto neither the will of 240 000 Georgians who are now refugees, nor that of the Georgian nation as a whole."
The local will of Abkhazia as a whole does not consist only of the will of 90 000 "Abkhazs" (Apsuas). It is the resultant of three wills:
The will of Apsua ("Abkhazian") population to view this territory as the spot of self-realization and eternal development for their nation.
The will of the Georgian population to view it as a spot of self-realization and eternal development for their nation.
The common will of all the population to live in health, peace, affluence and democracy
These three wills are not one, but they don't contradict one another, so, they are harmonizable, the more so, that Abkhazia has more than sufficient natural resources for that goal.
The most rational and realistic status of Abkhazia in the state of Georgia is that of autonomy, with the addition of special legal levers for the above-mentioned goal of building a full-fledged Apsua ("Abkhaz") civil society. The goal of realistically and justly defining the division of powers and competences comprises their division both
between Tbilisi and Sukhumi and
between Sukhumi and specific regions of Abkhazia.
 As to national (ethnical) diasporas - the Armenian, Azeri, Russian, Ossetian, the Greek and the lesser ones, who, in sum, make about 25% of the population, the best policy concerning them is to be, in the view of the Georgian majority, that of integration without assimilation, not that of cancelling the point "nationality" (which in Georgian means "ethnicity" as well) in the passports and other official documents, like the Shevardnadze clique did in 2001.
 The historical fact is to be kept in mind, that In 1860-ies and 1870-ies Russia arranged a mass deportation of Caucasian peoples, who had been Moslems since the XIV-XV centuries, to Turkey. The deportation ("Mohajir" movement") was formally a semi-deliberate one, really it was compulsory. Apsuas ("Abkhazs"), as Moslems of Adighean stock, were victims to it. About 50% of the Apsua population was deported. About half of those who remained (18 000 men, women and children) were saved from deportation by Georgian bureaucrats, who were advising the Apsua ("Abkhazian") population not to consent, and Georgian local clergy, who managed to christian 18 000 souls within several days. The Russian policy of motivating the Apsua ("Abkhaz") people against the Georgian stems from that event. This policy was successful. In the Russia-organized and Russia-waged war against Georgia in 1992-1993 (which fact never was ascertained formally by the Shevardnadze clique at the head of Georgia) a very great part of the Apsua ("Abkhazian") population took part in the genocide of local Georgian population and in "cleansing" Abkhazia from Georgians (The rest, at whose hands it was done, were the local Armenians, Cossacks' and other Russian citizens of Adighean stock. Chechens, though several hundreds of them took part in the hostilities, took little part in those crimes).
One of the main reasons, why the Apsuas (‘Abkhazs") bitterly oppose the restoring of Georgian sovereignty in the territory and the eventual returning of Georgian refugees, is the fear (or simulating the fear) of Georgian revenging those crimes. The typical Georgian, quite definitely, does not wish, nor plan a ‘revenge" that might touch persons not having taken part in the crimes or that may happen to be punished in a not completely legal form. The local Georgians believe that the suicidal idea "We shall vanish, but we shall not return to Georgia" is not the dominant one among the Apsuas ("Abkhazs") and that Georgia has more tools – and a more definite will – to save them, as nation, than any other country may have.
The Russia-inspired and Russia-guided so-called "cartographical aggression" against the Georgian state and Georgian nation since the second half of 1940-ies has been an intense and large-scale one. Suffice it to say, that the purely Georgian Kingdom "Apkhazeti" (founded VIII) — one of the purely Georgian Kingdoms of the time, the emergence of which was a form of resistance by the nation to the Arab conquest, - was by the soviet historiography declared to be that of to-day's "Abkhazs", i.e. Apsuas. This Kingdom having been successful (three decades after founding it the capital became Kutaisi, the center of Western Georgia, for about two centuries this Kingdom widened, comprising all the Western Georgia, "Apkhaz" became synonym for "western Georgian". The Kings of All Georgia (since X) were titled "Kings of Abkhazs, Kartvels (i.e. East Georgians) etc".). Yet, historical facts did not hamper the soviet ideology in teaching the growing generations that this kingdom was an "Apsua" one and that all the Georgian, Greek, Persian or Arab documents, mentioning "Apkhazs", refer to the Apsuas' ancestors. This propaganda has contributed a great deal to the formation of anti-Georgian mentality in those generations. The second-strong lever for this process was viewing the Georgian population as an obstacle to the soviet-made Apsua ("Abkhazian") ethnocracy.
As mentioned above, Georgia has five numerous national (ethnical) diasporas (the Armenian, Azeri, Russian, Ossetian, Greek ones) and a number of lesser ones. The Ossetian one, 160 000, resides partly, 60 000, in the Tskhinvali region, mingled with 30 000 Georgians, the majority of whom are expelled in 1989-92 and 2008, partly, 100 000, in other parts of Georgia. It is evident for any one who is willing to judge realistically, that national (ethnical) interests of diasporas are not to be linked to the territory of their residence in any other form than that of municipal self-government: If demographic dynamic, i.e. change in the ethnical percentage of the population (as result of immigration, of natural propagating or any other reason) is allowed to cause changes in the juridical and political status of the territory, it inevitably will stimulate every ethnical group to fear, in quite panic way, the demographic prosperity of any other group, thus leading to temptation for preemptive ethnical "cleansing" and its most efficient tool — genocide — all over the World. So, the principle "integration without assimilation", which the majority of the Georgian nation thinks to be the only fair and realistic one for their state's policies concerning national (ethnical)diasporas, is to apply two main mechanisms of serving the properly national (ethnical) interests of the latter: that of democratically developing municipal self-government and that of functional (not territorial) autonomy, i.e. of functioning non-territorial national (ethnical), institutions and organizations for lobbying and practically promoting those interests.
 Ossetians in Georgia are mainly a comparatively recent diaspora. The bulk of it immigrated from north in two decades after 1864 (the date of abolishing the serfdom in Georgia) and in the first two decades of soviet rule (after 1921). The name "South Ossetia" is a purely Russian invention with the overt goal to make use of the Ossetian population in north Caucasia – the only one in the region that had sympathized with the Russian conquest of it in XVIII-XIX – for facilitating the anti-Georgian demographical expansion that was being planned. The administrative unit "South Ossetian Autonomous Oblast" (SOAO) was a purely Russian creature, the decision to create it was taken by the "Caucasian Committee" (Rostov) and the "Central Committee" of Russia's Bolshevik Party (Moscow) in 1920, i.e. at a time, when Georgia was independent.
The existence of "South Ossetia" has no more grounds than that of "Western Turkeys", "Northern Senegasl" or "Northern Algerias" in any European suburb wherever the recent immigrants may have achieved majority among residents.
"South Ossetia" never has existed an hour without presence there of regular armed forces of USSR and Russian Federation. 
On 11.XII 1990 SOAO was legally abolished by the law of the Georgian Parliament (Supreme Council of the Republic Georgia). Neither the legislative bodies, nor the Government of the Soviet Union had at that time the legal right to intervene in Georgia's legislation according to the bill of 9.III.1990 by the Supreme Council of the Soviet Socialist Republic Georgia and the amendment to it by the same legislative body 20.VI 1990. The false term "South Ossetia" in the language of foreign diplomats and politicians is to be taken by the Georgian state as inadmissible. The fact that Georgia's present leadership thinks this language admissible has no explanation but that of its being criminally pro-Russian and irresponsible in the face of the country.

IV. The most urgent vital interests of Georgia
It is to be mentioned once more, that Georgia views itself as a western country, interested in:
Having a completely western-oriented (i.e. no more fearing eastern, southern and northern assaults) strategic atmosphere in the Black Sea and Caucasia region. This, practically, means, that, if formally allied with western democracies, Georgia considers it to be reasonable for its safety to run risks of being the forefront of the West in the East, in order to keep the frontier in the region calm and peaceful. Even more: this way of strategic orientation has, practically, no alternative for Georgia.
Being strong enough to be able to resist, in a reasonable span of time, the eventual assault by overwhelmingly big forces of neighboring superpower and other superior forces.
Being attracting, thanks to its western alliances, economical and cultural welfare, democracy and culture, for the North-Caucasian nations, in order, inter alia, to help the national self-consciousness of these nations to overshadow the purely confessional one.
Most intensely developing in basic science and education, in industry, in defense infrastructure and food security, in medical care and the quality of life for the population.
Being firmly and stably democratic, as a result of having developed a middle class, comprising the great majority of the nation.
Being important for the region as sea-linked country and provider of goods, supplies, technologies and ideas from the West to the East and, vice versa, of eastern goods, ideas and information to the West...
This view of eventual Georgia is, nowadays, overshadowed by immediate dangers that Georgia is to neutralize before it takes the road of free development. Those are (only the most urgent, absolutely vital ones are enumerated here):
a)	Uncontrolled immigration (it is to be abruptly stopped)
b)	Artificial ruining of industry and agriculture, stimulating thus mass emigration, disadvantageous urbanization, i.e. evacuation of villages and demographic disaster. Those processes are to be stopped and they can be stopped by active policies. 
c)	famine as a result of subverting the agriculture
d)	demographical catastrophe, as a result of slowly developing famine
e)	total demilitarization, i.e. defense impotence, as a result of absence of real standing army, civil defense, reservist service, defense production and adequate education (training). 
f)	reducing the educational level of the population nearly to zero
g)	diseases and epidemics as a result of absence of medical care

IV. Recommendations and wishes
I believe, western policies in Georgia and, accordingly, the image of the West in the eyes of the bulk of the Georgian nation are to be improved and can be improved. The main directions for it I think to be the following.
The idea of Mankind being governed by one will is very old, but utopian. Georgian political mentality is built on deeply democratic and genuinely democratic nationalism, i.e. on the idea, that Georgia is to survive and live, for years and centuries ahead, keeping its territory, its language and status, as an equal, in principle, nation among the nations of the world. The democratic spirit of the Georgian nation consists in loyalty to the principle, that citizens are to be equal in their right to be lawfully ruled and to rule, irrelative of their ethnicity, confession, gender and so on, in loyalty to the up to now codified Human Rights and international documents supporting these codes, and in genuine will for having the list of these rights growing. The West is to deeply understand this mentality and realize, that its only real ally in Georgia is the man or woman guided by these ideas. The West is to either support this mentality or to be neutral to it: the popular impression, that an individual, an organization, an institution, a political party, a government or a policy has the more probability to be supported by the West, the less pro-Georgian it is in its spirit, is to fade away.
The West is to be intolerant to the rigging of elections. The best it can do for Georgia in this sphere of political life, is to have one decisive parliamentary election in Georgia carried out by the UN.
The West should not object, even tacitly, to possible steps of Georgian governments which may be not in line with to-day's western practices in specific fields of internal policies but are indispensable for saving the country from ruin. Such steps are 
Stopping (most abruptly) immigration.
Postponing the selling of agricultural land to foreigners (up to the time when competitive Georgians emerge)
Stopping (for a time) selling strategically vital infrastructure to foreigners.
Recovering the power-stations sold (in a corrupted way and with pro-Russian political motive) to Russia.
Introducing a broad system of raising the defense capacity of Georgia.
Doing all that is possible for creating a cheap energy market and credit market, and for achieving food security.
Doing all that is possible for recovering science and education, including the development and teaching of basic science.
The Georgian Apostolic Church has been for fifteen centuries, and remains, pro- western in its spirit and policies. It has been, and remains, and, most probably, is going to remain the spiritual leader of the nation in its resistance to the non-Christian attacks from the east which are very likely to be renewed and last for a very long time. I believe, the Georgian Apostolic Church is to be quite demonstratively supported by western powers, not assaulted in petty intrigues by irresponsible NGO-s and small-minded individuals, profane or ecclesiastic, either ordered, or hired, or seduced by the opportunities of appearing on the TV screen.
 Those corrections, I believe, will suffice to make the western policies in Georgia persuasive for the bulk of the nation, like those of supporting Georgia in its resistance to the occupation of its territories by Russia are. Georgia's reciprocity is sure to have vast ground for displaying in the process of promoting common interests of safety and democracy in the Black Sea region, in South Caucasia, in Central Asia countries as stable partners and in the North Caucasia nations as allies.

With best wishes
N.Natadze
 20.09.2011
